Levels of Thinking
Carol Gilligan states that the post-conventional level of moral thinking can be dealt based on the two types of thinking. Gilligan’s theory is based on the two main ideas, the care-based morality (usually found in women) and the justice-based morality (usually found in men).

Care-based Morality
Care-based morality is the kind of thinking found in women. This is based on the following principles.
More emphasis is given to inter-connected relationships and universality.
Acting justly focuses on avoidance of violence.
Women with this are usually interested in helping others.
More common in girls because of their connections to their mothers.
Because girls remain connected to their mothers, they are less inclined to worry about issues of fairness.

Justice-based Morality
Justice-based morality is the kind of thinking found in men. This is based on the following principles.
They view the world as being composed of autonomous individuals who interact with one another.
Acting justly means avoiding inequality.
Individuals with this are usually interested in protecting individuality.
Thought to be more common among boys because of their need to differentiate between themselves and their mothers.
Because they are separated from their mothers, boys become more concerned with the concept of inequality.
The Carol Gilligan’s theory can be better understood if explained with an example.

In a Justice-based perspective, the solution to the problem is viewed as a conflict between two individual groups. Only one of them can have the property. Either moles or the porcupine will get the place in the burrow. Hence the solution to the dilemma, is not a resolution of the conflict, it is a verdict.
In a Care-based perspective, the approach differs. The problem is viewed as a difficult situation faced by both the parties together, rather than a fight between both of them. Hence the solution is sought in a way around the problem or to remove the problem completely. The solution may sound compromising but not damaging. The relationship will still be the same, after the resolution.
Researchers found that Justice-based perspective is pre-dominant among males while Care-based prospective is among females.

